We'd just like to welcome the Horizons Regional Council,
uh, who are joining us online
to submit on the emergency management bill.
Just see if we've got them there now.
Hi. Um, it says that the host, oh, here we go.
Hosts us Juststarting with you.
Yep. Amazing.
We are running, running a bit early,
but we're just checking to see if you're happy
to do your submission now.
Absolutely. Okay, fantastic.
Um, we've got 10 minutes to hear from you.
We've received a copy of your Russian submission,
so you are welcome to use all of that time.
We'll leave some time questions at the end,
and apologies, um, you won't be able,
there's many people sitting in the room,
although you won't be able to see that, um,
necessarily from the, from the image on Zoom.
So over to you. Okay,
Thank you very much. Um,
so I'm Sally Dryland
and I am, uh, representing the Council Lu.
Um, Nikki unfortunately is caught up
with response from the last, uh, event.
So, um, the event over the weekend and with me is, uh, Maria
and Matt who, uh, offices.
So, uh, a region is large, uh, exposed to a range
of natural hazards and is predominantly rural.
And, um, is the regional Council where, um,
the administrating authority
for the Mantu Wgnu Civil Defense Emergency Management Group.
Our submission focuses on strengthening the implementation
to ensure the system works in practice, not just in stature.
We focus on clarity, integration
and resourcing in the current environment
with proposed rates keeping
and concurrent reforms
to resource management and local government.
This creates a real implementation risk.
Councils may be permitted to increase rates
after a disaster,
but not enabled
to invest adequately in the preparedness beforehand.
We know disaster preparedness delivers a strong return.
The RIS is estimated this at 4.1, uh, sorry,
four to one, but there is still an upfront cost
in our region.
This is not theoretical.
We are the only region in New Zealand without a rain radar,
which significantly compromises our ability to prepare
for short notice extreme weather events.
We strongly support strengthening Iwi
and Hapu participation.
The bill recognizes their value,
but does not provide funding to support this
participation in our region.
Marai provide critical welfare support and emergencies.
They should not be left carrying the financial burden
in alignment with other major reforms.
The emergency management does not operate in isolation.
Hazard responsibilities currently span the CDM Act, the RMA
and the Local Government Act.
These are all under reform as drafted.
There are risk of inconsistent terminology,
overlapping hazard planning functions
and misalignment between regional plans, spatial plans,
and the National Emergency management plan.
These inconsistencies create uncertainty for implementation.
Flood protection infrastructure providers should be added
to Schedule three as essential infrastructure
and water service providers that provide only a minor aspect
of water services should be excluded
disproportionately affected.
Communities must be defined to ensure consistent
identification of these communities
and that addressing these their concerns sits at the
appropriate level of government.
Meaningful consultation,
consultation timeframe should be specified
at least 20 working days for national strategies, plans
and regulations, arrangements for
how offers of assistance will be managed.
And arra arrangements
for animal welfare should be both set nationally.
In closing, horizon supports the direction of reform.
A region knows firsthand the importance of a strong, clear
and coordinated emergency management system.
Legislation alone will not strengthen the system.
Implementation depends on resourcing clarity
and alignment with targeted amendments, particularly
around funding, iwi participation
and legislative integration.
This bill could deliver a resilient, equitable
and nationally consistent emergency management system.
Thank you. And look, we welcome your questions.
Thank you so much. We do have, uh, some questions.
We'll start with Celia Wade Brown.
Thank you Chair. Uh, thank you for your written submission
and your oral points.
Um, on the issues of funding
and, um, the over
80 billion million,
um, that you referred to in the regulatory impact statement,
did you have any analysis of how much that might mean for
Horizons, is my first question.
Second question was you refer to the need
to not just include,
but also to resource Iwi Maori for their role, um,
perhaps both in planning and in, um, response.
So both readiness and response.
Again, do you have any quantum of funding
that we would be talking about?
Uh, RA Matt c and group senior management advisor?
Um, in terms of the $82.8 million for the, uh,
RIS, um, from the Appendix A, uh, we estimate
for our group, um,
which covers generally the, the, um, one two Nui region, um,
around the 1.3 to $1.5 million from that,
um, per year over that four year period.
There are a couple of issues around that
where we can't define it more clearly than that.
And the reason is, um,
this has been split across the country
and we have 16 civil defense emergency management groups
operate 16 different ways
that have different funding levels,
different hazard escapes.
So it's pretty hard to to go too far through that
to, to really define it.
Um, that also doesn't cover operational expenditures,
it doesn't cover the cost of meeting high standards.
It's more around consulting.
Uh, and it really stops at that planning and strategic level
and then magically it just happens,
um, in the community level.
So there's that big gap in in funding.
So there are some, some concerns around
the expectation on local
and regional government to fund this, um, for the,
from legislation, uh, in terms
of the Iwi Maori compensation, uh,
and engagement, again, we don't have the,
the clearly defined, um, costings,
but in terms of anecdotally, um, we are expecting iwi
to come and consult with us essentially for free.
Uh, or they, um, they invoice us, um,
through our arrangements through regional regional council.
Um, yeah, and Maria can add to that
and then I can get into the operational,
uh, response aspect.
Yeah, Kiara, Maria, policy analyst.
Um, look, we've got over 30 iwi groups in our region,
and only around seven of them have settled.
So for our region in particular, a lot
of those groups don't necessarily have the resourcing
to adequately participate in engagement processes,
particularly those that require specialist knowledge,
like in that emergency management planning space.
Um, so providing some resourcing, whether that was, um,
you know, consultancies to engage
with them in obtain their views
and then put it into planning speak.
Um, those sorts of things would be really useful,
but we don't have the ability to quantify that.
Apologies.
And in terms of the operational, uh, aspect of it, so, uh,
MRI step up from a welfare perspective every time there's an
emergency, we all know that they don't fit in
with the very prescribed, um, way of delivering welfare
through, uh, national, um,
funding mechanisms through the national plan.
So that's through the, the local authorities.
And so a lot of the time, um, marai step up, they will, um,
provide that monarchy tanga,
however they feel they need to for their people.
Um, we've got examples of ERO fire where one of them
or I stood up and prepared food
for 50 people, they didn't turn up.
So what happens to that food
and what happens to the money that's been spent on that?
Um, so we know that government will come in afterwards
and do bespoke packages for Marai.
We've seen that in Cyclone Gabriel, we've seen
that in the January, uh, weather event in, um,
and we are asking for that to actually be a formal process
before an emergency so people understand
what their expectations are.
I hope that answers your question.
Uh, it's very clear, very helpful, thank
You. Thank you. We just
have one final question, if that's okay
with you, uh, from Andy Foster.
Yeah, look, thank you very much and thanks
for the work you that you're doing.
Um, just in terms of this, um, support for, uh, Mariah,
but actually we've heard this more broadly for people
who are taking initiative during, um, uh,
during emergency situations.
And we had an example of somebody
that was a VE in this case, taking a helicopter up, uh, to,
you know, to get to animals which are in difficulty.
And then of course you've got the issue of are they exposed
to carrying the cost or not carrying the cost is,
but then you don't, you don't want people going overboard
sometimes and, but you wanna get them
the, the right level of response.
Is there a, have you given any thought to what sort
of model we might have to say, look, these are the kind
of things without getting too bureaucratic,
these are the kind of things that, you know,
the government would reimburse, um, just
but be, be reasonable about it?
Or is it, you know, is it just a let sit down
and be reasonable about these things?
Or is there a, a way of guiding what's okay?
And maybe what might be going too far?
Uh, yeah, look in the 2023 version of the bill
that there was a provision for reimbursing iwi
for expenses in relation to emergencies.
So I anticipate that perhaps there was some work done on
how that would be implemented.
Um, from our point of view, I think, you know,
what is reasonable, putting some examples
and some definite missions around that,
that could be appropriate.
But, um, yeah, that's new hands
During, um, cycling, Gabrielle, there was also a lot of,
um, the rural support trust, the Rural Coordination group
and the MARIAL funds were all used for the likes
of the vet getting in. So, um,
Yeah, and, and when you're talking about the vet for,
for example, as a, as an example of that animal welfare one,
it, it really highlights the need for
that national consistency
because, uh, civil defense
through local government is not actually funded
to provide animal welfare.
NEMA is not provided to provide animal welfare other than
companion animal food.
NPI doesn't provide animal welfare, uh,
from a delivery cost only a, uh, uh,
strategic coordination costs.
And so it's either the people, um, whose animals that, that,
that need to be looked after
or local authorities that actually be that Bronx.
So it's really about setting
that expectation from a national level around what will
and won't be included.
And that's from public and also from local authorities and,
and other government agencies as well.
So it's really about that whole holistic, uh, response
to the, the whole community.
Thank you. Thank you. That
doesn't give us an answer, but it does. Has
No, I think there's a good pointer in there in looking at
the 2023, um, bill.
So thank you very much for that. Thank you.
We have run just slightly gone over time,
so thank you very much, um, for being generous
with your time and just acknowledging, um,
those in your region who are dealing with, um,
the significant, uh, the fallout from the,
from the weather events over the past week.
So I appreciate, um, you giving some time to us today.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Thank you. You
Thank you. I think we'll
now, um, we're just skipping
around a, we bit on the agenda.
We're gonna go to Auckland Council who understand,
ready to speak with us.
Hi there. Just one, one person?
Yeah. Okay.
Do you wanna just double check with them?
There's a meeting room waiting for them.
Okay, we'll just, yeah. Okay.
We're just waiting for the, um, meeting room
to join as a panelist.
Well, they decline the, uh, request,
So is a message just to accept the panelist.
Oh, fantastic. Okay, great.
Yes. Hello?
Oh, come back.
I think we're just waiting for a meeting room.
Wasn't council to,
so it's an additional room, is that right?
Yes, they are. Yeah, here we are.
Fantastic. Hello. Welcome.
Kda elf. We can't, I think you're still on mute,
so we'll just wait to Oh, fantastic.
Can you hear us? Yeah,
we can hear you quite far away,
but that's, that's fine. Yeah. Uh,
Because we're in KO on Kamala be,
Yeah, yeah. Fair enough.
You are actually literally far away as well.
Um, thank you so much
for joining us a a little bit early today.
We've received a copy of your written submission
and we've got 10 minutes set aside for your oral submission.
Uh, so we'll let you use, uh, that, uh, for your, um,
comments or if you wanna leave some time
for questions, that's fine as well.
But, um, over to you, Alf. Thank you. Bye.
Um, if, if it's okay, um, I just wanted to open up first
and then I'll hand it through to, uh,
Yeah, that's fine.
Defense and emergency management.
Um, at this stage, I just very briefly just wanted
to acknowledge you, you all chair, um,
all the mahi that you all do.
There are some familiar faces around that table
that I know personally.
Um, there's several other members as well.
And I think I've taken up the time, um, Um, um, uh,
uh, too much time.
But look, I just wanted to, to to acknowledge the, uh, our,
our community that have passed
and I bring it back to us, uh, the living, um, chair.
Uh, I just wanted to let you know
before I pass it on to, to Sarah Ali for, uh,
this, uh, deputation.
Um, I just wanted to let you know that we, uh,
ended up having a workshop with our committee, um,
of Civil Defense Emergency Management,
and we took it through to the governing body, uh,
with our submission, and that, uh, was approved unanimously.
Uh, and now we're here.
So we just thank you for giving us the opportunity.
I want to acknowledge all the, uh, that we have at the K
and I'll pass it on to Sarah
and she'll then introduce the team.
Thank you Kiara and, and du the chair
and the members of the governance administration committee
for allocating Auckland Council.
This oral hearing on the emergency management bill,
number two, Coursera.
Um, I'm head of capability
and strategy at Auckland Emergency Management,
and I'm joined by Adam Mags, um, general manager
and group chair, uh, group manager for, um,
Auckland Emergency Management
and also Wayne Brown, principal Recovery Advisor.
And, um, sitting in the corner is Jess Johnston, um,
special Council for public law
for any technical aspects as well.
So you have our submission, as you've mentioned.
Um, and our purpose today is
to emphasize our overall support for the bill
and draw the committee's attention to, uh,
three technical aspects that particularly impact Auckland.
So the bill reflects Auckland's own improvement pathway
since the North island severe weather events of 2023
with tangible progress, um, um, in building our capability,
our capacity, and our community connection.
And that's captured in our group plan
and our subsequent reporting.
Our submission states
that Auckland Council broadly supports the bill
and the need for a fully funded
national improvement program.
Our submission recommends several key refinements based on
our lived experience in Auckland,
and namely, clearer recognition of the crucial role
of individuals, whanau, iwi, and communities.
A stronger positioning of iwi Maori
as enduring partners within the emergency san uh,
management system, enabling recovery to grow
to the same level of maturity as response
and addressing compliance costs
and that risk of cost shifting to local government.
The submission also recommends some technical amendments in
support of our submission points,
and I'll just elaborate on three of these.
Um, first of all, around the change definition of emergency,
the council supports the updated definition of emergency,
which now focuses on whether an event requires a significant
coordinated response.
We believe this wording will make it easier
for decision makers to determine when the threshold
for declaring a state of emergency has been met.
Um, we reflect that following the 2023 weather events,
there has been strong public scrutiny around the timing
of declarations, particularly in Auckland.
There is now a greater understanding
that a declaration is not only an operational tool,
it also plays an important role in signaling the seriousness
of an event, providing reassurance,
and also helping the public respond appropriately.
Given this shift in expectations,
Auckland Council would welcome updated national guidance.
Consistent guidance would help ensure declarations are
applied uniformly across the sector.
And it would also be helpful for that guidance to clarify
how far declarations should be used
as a public information tool while still recognizing the
extraordinary powers that accompany a state of emergency.
My second point relates to, um, who is authorized
to declare a state of emergency,
and this is a particularly Auckland, um, issue.
So we would like to highlight that the provisions relating
to who is authorized to declare a state of emergency, um,
are unclear when applied to Auckland.
And this relates to clauses 49
and 50, which set out two different pathways.
Clause 49 allows authorized persons appointed
by the Emergency Management Committee to declare
for whole areas multiple districts or multiple wards.
While clause 50 gives mayors
of territorial authorities the power to declare
for individual districts or wards within their districts.
So Auckland, um, as you may be aware,
does not have multiple districts.
It's a unitary authority with a single district.
As a result, it's unclear how Clause 50 is intended
to operate here in Auckland.
Specifically, we, um, request clarity on whether the Mayor
of Auckland is empowered by Clause 50 part two
for declarations affecting the whole Auckland District,
or whether the mayor must instead be an appointed,
be appointed as an authorized person under clause 49.
If clause 50 part two is intended to apply.
It would also be helpful to clarify whether the hierarchy
exists between whether a hierarchy exists between Clause 49
and clause 50 in determining
who should make a declaration for the Auckland area.
And additionally, based on current drafting, it appears
that in a unitary, unitary authority context,
where there's only one district
that only the mayor is authorized to declare
for a single ward, as there is no provision
for an authorized person to do so in clause 49.
Um, that also, um, flows on, we believe into our, um,
the authorities of our controllers,
and we've set that out in recommendation three.
So I won't repeat it here.
Uh, and we have a final pro, uh, point that I'd like
to raise around the provisions relating
to lead agencies and share.
We would like to raise an issue with the Bill's definition
of lead agency.
The bill defines a lead agency
as a government agency identified in the national emergency
plan, because government agency is not defined,
it is unclear how this applies in a local
or regional emergency,
or where the emergency management committee,
so formally the Sedum group, has traditionally acted
as the lead agency.
We are seeking clarification on a, a key point.
Our emergency management committee still intended
to be the lead agency for hazards such as severe weather,
geological events or infrastructure failure.
Or does the bill intend
that the national level agency will always act as lead even
for regional scale events?
So if the intention is to shift lead agency responsibilities
for local and regional emergencies to the national level,
in all cases, that would be a significant departure from
current practice and we would appreciate clarity on how
that would operate in real terms.
And we therefore recommend that the bill confirm the status
of lead agencies for local and regional emergencies
and provide clear guidance on
how these roles will function under the new framework.
So that concludes our submission.
Um, we welcome any questions you may have.
Thank you so much for that detailed submission
and for going through, um, all of the different, um, aspects
of how it was approved as well.
Um, I just wanted to, um, if I might ask a question first
around, uh, the, the issues around
the other parts of the act.
You've clearly outlined 49
and 50 in relation to issues of definitions
and the lead agency definition.
But in terms of the rest of the parts of the bill,
is there anything in particular that you want to highlight
that would be, uh, different
or, um, slightly more challenging for Auckland?
Just in terms of, uh, Auckland's position within New Zealand
as, as a bigger city and obviously having quite different
unitary governance arrangements?
One Wine
Certainly, uh, in the submission
and as addressed in recommend recommendation five,
we do believe it could be clearer in regard to high density.
Yeah, I saw that. But for body corporates, right? Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. That's really, yeah, that's good. Okay.
That's really helpful. I'm just checking if
other, uh, Andy Foster.
Yeah, look, thank you very much
and Alf, nice to see you there.
Mm-hmm. Um, look, two questions.
Uh, the first one of 'em is you said, um,
that you wanted recovery to grow to the same level
of maturity as a response.
One of the questions which I've asked a number of people,
including NEMA
and the minister, is about the other end, the other parts,
the other two ares right at the front end, uh, trying
to make sure that we are resilient
and we, you know, we've got good planning at the front end
so we don't end up putting people in property in harm's way.
And obviously you've had the situation, uh, through Hale
and Gabrielle of, uh, an area getting flooded
and then saying, well, actually we don't wanna
have further development that area.
How important is get that also, uh, right, uh,
in terms of things like land use and, uh, spatial planning.
Uh, and so those things are aligned
and also that works with, um,
resilient infrastructure in terms of lifelines so
that they don't fail, had a number of submitters, uh, saying
that particularly communications have failed,
um, uh, too readily.
And my second question, if I can ask, uh, in terms of
who authorized the state of emergency in the, um, storms
that happened hit the south island, um,
they happened at the time or just
after the, um, local body elections, and
because there was no mayor that were the,
there was an outgoing mayor,
there was an incoming mayor, hadn't been sworn in yet.
It ended up being the, the, um, the minister who declared,
um, emergencies in that situation.
Be fair to say that a lot of the local councils weren't
particularly pleased that that gap was there.
Um, should we fix that and if so, how?
Okay. Certainly in response to the first question,
we appreciate that the, um, intent of the bill
and the program that has been behind it
is about addressing the emergency management system
and with changes to other legislation
and greater connection, climate change, adaptation,
et cetera, we are aware that that system extends beyond
emergencies itself, particularly in regard
to, uh, reduction.
Um, we would see that there is a need for, um,
improvements right across the board, um, around
how we respond to natural hazards, be that
through land use planning or
how we respond in communicating risk, uh, two communities.
Um, as regards to the second question, um, we would see
that having the ability to authorize persons
to declare could also help in that situation where
between elections, there is no mere in office.
Okay, so you could make a sort of standard situation that
before the election, well
before the election result is, uh, confirmed,
you might say it's the old one.
Uh, and if the election result is once the election results
confirmed, even though not sworn and could be the new one,
and if they're the same person,
it becomes absurdity if they can't make the declaration.
Yes, yes. It, we, we do believe
that the provision would help to address that situation.
No, thank you. Yeah, thank you.
Just for, uh, almost out of time now
with a final question from Lamon and Lydia, so Sydney.
Oh, thank you. Thanks.
Um, chair Alf and your members, just very quickly, uh,
you've already made a recommendation in terms of the role
of Iwi Maori, just really wanted to understand, um, in terms
of not just raising, uh, things like funding,
but also around cultural values, Maori land and Mahi tap.
Can you just speak a little bit more about
that to be more explicit?
Um, certainly, um, in Auckland in the way
that we operate our Sims function, we have taken out, um,
iwi Maori liaison
and elevated it to VA function itself
with a dedicated team, um, working directly
with the controller, the response manager
and others to help to influence decisions to ensure that,
uh, sensitivities,
cultural sensitivities are taken into account.
Um, we did, uh, hear in, uh,
our engagement on the development of the bill
that there is concern that, uh,
powers under a declaration could be used in a manner
for the right reason, uh,
but inadvertently cause some harm if it's, uh, interrupting
with or, or other areas that is more sensitive.
So we are really well aware that there is that need for, uh,
engagement and good information flow, um, the ability
to influence decisions, uh,
but also there is that wider aspect
where Mariah are often first to stand up, um,
and very, um, supportive of the entire system.
Yeah, I would just add to
that it is also the program we have around, um, in readiness
and in preparation for response
that we ensure we work closely with, um, iwi Maori
to ensure that we're fully aware of where, um,
those sensitivities lie and use, um, and incorporate Maori
and Maori into, um, our planning for emergencies
and how we prepare
and how that informs how we prepare for emergencies as well.
So there's a, um, a strong program of
that which we believe is embedded
and reflected in our group plan
and carried out through the provisions
that we have within our BAU staffing as well
as our response arrangements. Thank
You so much. Thank
you. We are now out of time,
but thank you so much for your engagement with the committee
and we'll definitely take, um, all your comments
and your, um, detailed recommendations from your written
submission, uh, onboard and our consideration of this bill.
So Koto, thank you so much for joining us, um,
and uh, we appreciated your time today,
Kia.
Thank you. We've now got, uh, Kiwi Rail Holdings
for joining usda Welcome
Kia. I'm
Maria, senior Corporate Council, Kira,
and I'm here with Dave Gordon,
who's our Chief Officer Metro.
Thank you. Welcome, uh, to both of you.
Uh, we've got your written submission,
we've got 10 minutes to hear from you today.
You're welcome to use that time
or leave some time for questions from members.
Uh, over to you.
Thank you, chair. Uh, uh,
I doubt whether we've got 10 minutes worth of talking.
There's really only three points we wanted to cover off.
The first is the inter island ferries are excluded.
The present moment from the bill, which, uh,
given the role they play, you know, keeping the connections
between north and South island, something we need to,
I think should be remedied.
Our next comment on that is based as much on how ignorance
of what can and can be in there.
But I just looking at it from a pragmatic point of view,
I don't think the nation bothers that much in an emergency.
Who does the transport across the Cook Strait in those
circumstances and where the Blue bridge should also be
and basically that clause to any party engaged in
the service, very service across the street.
But I dunno how that works,
but it would seem to be a practical thing to, to bring in,
bring into consideration.
Second point is, uh, more around the, the fact that
to a large extent a lot of the civil defense work
and the things we're involved with involved a lot
of volunteer time, et cetera.
It just comes back to the, the funding of this
and the affordability for a lot
of people involved in the exercise.
We support it, it's the right thing to do.
Goodness knows we've dealt with enough, uh,
major civil defense things through Kaikora,
Gabrielle anniversary, weekend floodings,
and as you know, as recent as, uh, the weekend
with the various floods.
So it is important that the structures are there.
We support it. It's whether the, how,
how the volunteers in particular
and the others can be properly supported.
That fourth,
third point is just access to the rail corridor.
Again, the, the corridor is used in emergencies,
so we would think it'd be useful just to have a corridor,
rail corridor specific clause.
This is the point raised under 17 in our submission.
And we are happy to do some drafting to provide that, to,
to support the committee to say what is necessary.
Again, it's ke keeping it,
like we're not talking about people with IDs, et cetera.
It's just a pragmatic thing
that someone on the rail corridor when trains are running
without any protection can lead to,
uh, in incidents.
And those are the key points.
Chair and hand back to the committee.
Thank you so much. I, I mean, I think just speaking
for myself, um, it would be helpful
to have some more information about the rail corridor
that we can at least pass on to our advisors
who are advising us on that.
So I think if you, if you did, um, want
to send any more information through on that,
that would be really appreciated.
I do have a question from, uh, Celia Wade Brown.
Thank you. Thank you for appearing.
And, um, as, as a passenger on the Kai, um,
it's the most interesting reminder, um, for me
that this from you, that this might not be included.
Um, I wondered,
'cause I haven't looked at that aspect of the bill.
Is it only the inter island ferries that are excluded
or other, other, um, like cruise ships and so on? Included
In the way Schedule three sets out?
Um, essential infrastructure
and refers to it broadly, not by entity.
So it refers to, for example, under transport
to the rail network, but doesn't refer to ferries.
And so I think that the inter islander ferry service should
be referred to in that list.
So that way it's not beholden to an operator.
It's relating to the specific fer. Yes.
Not branded, correct.
But the inter island ferries services. Correct.
Irrespective provider to Southview. Yes.
Right. Thank you very much.
They are an integral part of our transport network.
Thank you, Andy Foster.
Yeah, look, uh, thank you and good to see you both.
Um, question I wanted to ask you about, again,
about the in trial and services is
what difference does it make if they are
or not in the schedule in terms of how you would expect
to be used, uh, in a, in an emergency situation
or that they might be able
to be used in an emergency situation?
Well, I, I think that the current definition talks about
essential infrastructure providers
and if they're included on the list,
they're an essential infrastructure provider,
which means not only do they need to have a plan
and emergency, but they get involved in
that cri critical planning phase.
So there's a risk if they're not included, that people doing
that critical planning and talking
to other essential infrastructure providers don't
include them or talk to them.
And, and that would be an admission.
So it's a matter of being engaged in the process. Yeah,
Correct. Yeah. Yeah,
I think respect your question, Andy, you know,
two days later after the thing that, that the trial
and I would be in boots and all in terms
of helping the thing, it just comes
to getting the planning right in the first instance.
So is this the kind of thing I I, I use an example, um,
that, uh, you know, you've got the ability to use that as a,
as a power bank effectively potentially, uh, if you have a,
you know, a failure at one end
or other of the, of the, the system potentially.
Well, those tho those, those are some of the things, uh,
whether we can do that at the moment.
I, I'm not sure, but it did, you know, the in trial
and theory could also become the means by which you, you,
you transport people, not necessarily to pick them,
but potentially to Christchurch.
There's a number of things that it could perform in the
event if we had, you know, if we had a serious
Alpine fault. Right.
What else could Do,
And the final question if I can on that one is I, I,
I'd have to have a, have to go back
and have a look at what the schedule actually looks like,
um, but other ports in that as well.
I believe so. Okay.
Right. 'cause if they're not, there's not much point in
putting the, the
vessels in there if you haven't got the ports. Also,
I haven't got that in front of me, but I, I believe so.
Yeah. Okay. No, thank you. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you. I think that's, um, all of our time
that we have with you today.
So thank you very much for your clear submission
and um, if you did wanna provide
that additional information,
we are more than happy to receive that.
So thank you so much both. You. Thank you. See you.
That's our last, um, submission of today. So we'll just.